---
title: A brief history of management
draft: true
---

Software engineering management is an interesting business. The vast majority of
people in there are essentially ex-engineers who never formally studied business
or management. The knowledge transference happens in an ironically archaic way
by the word of mouth and best practice sharing.

I don't want to go into the efficacy of this process today, and instead focus on
the history of management. History might be a rather dry subject, but it's
important because without knowing how we arrived to where we are, it is
difficult to plot the way forward.

I'll do my best to make it entertaining though.

## The ugly old days

We don't really have much of written account of management practices in the old
days. It suffices to assume though that it involved a lot of basically punching
people into faces until they do what they were told.

The earliest practices that would be considered "management" were probably the
process of taxation of occupied territories. Which again, most likely, involved
maintaining a careful balance of punching people in the face just enough for
them to part with their belongings and not cause them to start punching you
back. Or, well, die of starvation.

The old days were ugly, and we don't punch people in faces as much any more.
But, I think it is important to appreciate the fact that the roots of the
management are in coercing people into doing something they didn't really want
to.

## The industrial revolution

With the advent of mechanized means of production, the societal structure
changed dramatically. Now, in addition to the royalty and the peasants, we have
those who _own_ the means of production, and those who _work_ there. And with
that we could say that the management and the working classes were established.

It is a mistake though to think of those as managers and workers in the modern
sense of the word. They where more like oompa-oompas and pain administrators.
Because the choice for those workers was to either die of starvation on the
streets, or work in atrocious conditions and die of heavy metals poisoning while
working at a factory.

The managers job here is mostly to maintain a steady supply of poor bastards and
keep up the discipline in attempts to prevent people from rioting too much.

Fun fact. This is where our obsession with the office hours originates from. As
well as the school education system, which is basically designed to prepare you
to work at a factory until you either die, or become unusable.

You know those managers who want you to travel to the office and maintain stable
office hours for no particular reason other than them believing that this is the
right way to work? Well, they still pretty much live here mentally, and they
probably see you essentially as oompa-loompas.

## The second industrial age

By the second industrial age we normally mean the era that starts around the
first world war. That is when the military-industrial complex and large
industrial factories were born. And this is where the actual managerial and
working classes truly come to play.

This is the era when the factory management started to show interest in their
workers well being across the globe. I like to think that it downed on them that
happy workers work better. But, most likely, it was the result of the fact that
manufacturing work became so complex that beating workers into a stupor was
counter productive.

Along with the change in the employee/employer dynamics, this is where we see
the first attempts at improving the production processes at the global scale.
Which gave the birth to two ideas that are still very much at play to this day.

The first one was the idea of the org structure and specialisation. No more
running around the shop doing a little bit of everything. Now there is a ladder
and a military style ranking system. There are people who think and there are
people who do.

And the second one is the relentless processes optimisation. Because much of the
factory work is repetitive, managers were literally standing next to workers
with a stopwatch and benchmarking the expected performance. And in addition to a
job description we now have the KPIs. Welcome to waking up every morning to
labour under capitalism.

Believe it or not, because they took measurements, they called it the
"scientific management method". Which gave the birth to the "if you can't
measure it, you can't improve it" mentality that is very much present throughout
most of the industries to this day. There is still no end of managers who want
to run a "data driven" company and treat people as disposable units.

## The raise of the creative class

It took two world wars, countless conflicts in asia, and probably close to a
quarter of billion people dead for militant imperialism to fall out of fashion.
And at that point people started question whether working their entire life as a
cog in a giant machine is a life worth living.

You see, not everything that is important in life can be measured. Actually, if
you stop for a second and listen to those old greece philosophers who died 2000
years ago. You'd know that value is inherently subjective and hence
unmeasurable. And so people started asking questions.

The world was, and still is, a very much class based society, but now there was
a new class of people: the intellectuals and creatives. People who create
knowledge and experience for a living. And those people are way too privileged
to be managed the old ways. And so, the management adopted.

Instead of coercing people into doing what they're want them to do by imposing
various structures, managers started to focus more and more on "gardening"
people. They would tend to their needs and wants, and empower them to make their
own decisions. All in the name of maximising the shareholders profits,
obviously.

Because the first economies of scale started to kick in, the management quickly
figured out that investment in people and diversity is the most profitable.
Because _people_ are the ones who _create_ new products. And cornering the
market with a new product is a much better deal than competing in a saturated
market.

And this is where we start seeing the shift towards the servant leadership
styles, and managers who are not the subject matter experts. Empathy and people
skills become some of the most desired qualities in a manager.

## The stone age of software

Coming on this legacy, we can see how the early days of the software industry in
the 80s, 90s were panning out. Most of the software was developed by that
privileged ex-academia group of people who were treated as special--hence the
term "specialist", jk. Everything around them would still work on the old
factory mindset, KPIs and all.

Because most of those early days software companies were overcapitalised, they
could tank the unpredictability of their few creative class workers and
otherwise manage the processes as waterfall projects. And hence the new breed of
managers was born, the project managers.

Now we're starting to see this weird blend of managers who don't really know
what is that exactly their specialists do and yet have the incessant need to
manage. They would bikeshed by assigning JDs and KPIs as they would at a factory
floor, and the creatives would sign basically anything that will let them have a
play day every day. And as long as value still produced both sides agree to
pretend that it's all going their way.

As the profits and the size of these organisations grew, they did the only thing
they knew how to do. They turned into feature factories. Org structures,
seniority ladder, and everything. Welcome to the corporate america.

A significant part of this setup was that making software in 80s/90s involved a
whole lot of non-programming overheads, such as building infrastructure,
marketing, physical copies manufacturing, distribution, etc. Which were a
subject to the standard methods of planning and execution. Hence the feature
factory actually made sense.

## The age of startups

Two things came out of the corporate software development world. Firstly, the
naive believe in great personalities and the overnight success; corporates
looove retelling the humble beginnings stories well into their oppressive
behemoth stage. And secondly, thanks to the ubiquitous internet infrastructure,
the barrier for the new businesses entry fell to the floor level.

You see, corporates might not had figured how to reconcile the creative and the
factory management. I mean, nobody yet figured the way to reconcile between the
bohemian, bourgeoisie, and the working classes after all. But, at least they
knew how to run a tight factory. In contrast, the 20-somethings who never held a
day job and now in a startup wouldn't know much of anything about management.

And so, what do you do when you believe that you're basically an immortal
incarnation of Steve Jobs, and you have convinced your mom to invest her
retirement fund into your web page? That's right, you reject everything people
tell you and then start throwing everything at the wall and see what sticks.
Welcome to the age of agile.

Well, that's if you're the smart one. Statistically speaking you're more likely
to gain 15 kilos by stress eating, and disappoint your mom within 3 years by
basically blindly repeating what your peers do: practice scrum, overhire when
everyone is hiring, and then go through 3 rounds of layoffs when things get
dicey.

How can we live as an industry with a 90% failure rate? Same as the scratch
ticket addicts do, you ignore the facts and keep believing that you're special.
No amount of facts and reasoning will convince an average startup leadership
that blindly following agile practices is bad for their health, and that scrum
makes them make stupid decisions on a daily basis.

In all seriousness though, the significance of this period is that because
startups are tight strapped for cash, they could not afford to run the same
machinery as the corporates do. And once again, the management practices had to
adopt. People started to experiment with custom roles, flat org-structures, and
borrowing heavily from the LEAN manufacturing practices. Because when you're a
small 10 people shop there is no point in overcomplicating things.

As the result, this is where we the raise of the product management and scrum
masters as the decisions makers; as opposed to the traditional business people
calling all the shots. Which had a huge impact on how we manage software
engineering teams.

The problem was that they over corrected the change towards product function.
And although they would structure teams as cross-functional, they wouldn't act
as cross functional teams. Most product management was essentially the old
project management in disguise, and the amount of suffering that inflicted on
engineering teams still reverberates through the community.

## The open-source land

Speaking of having no access to professional management. Do you know what would
be a manager's most feared nightmare? Open-source. Thousands of people living in
a weird anarchic frenzy and delivering the best quality and most complex
software on the planet, completely remote and without a single meeting or a
manager involved. No offices, no org-structures, no KPIs.

The actual realities of open-source work are a bit more complex than that
though.

Firstly, there are at least two generations of open-source now. The original
founding generation was essentially a rebellion against their corporate
overlords. And then there is the generation of software engineers who grew up
with open-source practices as a norm, and so they expect similar setups at their
day jobs.

Secondly, the _no management_ in open-source is a bit of a myth. There are
layers of ad-hoc community management. They abandoned KPIs and the annual
performance reviews as stupid ideas, but it doesn't mean they don't plan and
coordinate their work.

And lets not forget that open-source is essentially overcapitalised in term of
access to the human talent. Which means that one doesn't really need to run a
tight ship and manage well. If an idea is good and hyped up enough, there will
be no end of willing volunteers ready to commit endless human-hours into moving
the project forward.

Whether we like it or not, open-source community had a huge impact on work
environment expectations that engineers have those days. This is where remote
work and hate for meetings and pointless HR paperwork comes from. And once
again, management had to adopt. In many good companies those days, DX, community
engagement, and security have just as much value as customer or stakeholder
value.

## Here and now

Today's software engineering management landscape is a very interesting one. It
has layers upon layers of ideas from the previous generations, often some of
those completely contradicting each other. And on top of that there is an
incessant need to keep improving and finding every edge that can help.

I think it's easier to think of this landscape as a gradient, that goes from
completely ad-hoc practices to heavily structured corporate environments. And
most companies are actually on a transition path from one end to another.
Startups -> scaleups -> enterprise.

There are few truisms that we have figured out on our journey here though:

1. No function should have the upper hand and truly collaborative environments
   are the ones that produce results most consistently
2. People don't need as much management as we thought they do. Autonomy and
   enablement are the keys to performance
3. There is no way of predicting the market, and an iterative approach to
   delivery is the most effective one
4. Organisations need structure but the structure should not be prescriptive
5. In creative professions KPIs and annual performance reviews is a colossal
   waste of everyone time and energy

On a personal note, management those days often feels a lot like parenting. And
I'm not talking about treating employees like children. What I mean is that
there are lots of ways to raise children, and most of them work quite well. And
yet parents will vehemently disagree on the subject. We are just oversaturated
with practices and ideas at the moment, and everyone only sees the ones that
they have personally experienced.

In that light, I believe that the right way to manage a company is the one that
works. Gee-whiz, thanks for nothing, Kai

## The future

An interesting cultural quirk of humans is that every generation has a tendency
to think that they are the pinnacle of morality and best practice, and everyone
before them were basically unwashed savages.

And it's probably true. But, if we follow this line of thinking then we arrive
to the inevitable conclusion that in a generation or two, it is us who will look
like unwashed savages. And I'm kind of weirdly excited about that. It gives me
hope.

But, there is another way to think about it. Management, at its essence is all
about managing complexity. Unfortunately, our barely evolved monkey brains are
made of meat and not all that great at dealing with complexity. We have all
sorts of biases, glitches, and emotions; eww. And you know who are great at
dealing with a lot of unwieldable complexity? That's right.

I for one welcome our new computer overlords.
