---
slug: pnBD0
title: What business value is made of
---

When we hear people talking about business value it often sounds rather vague.
Business value, customer value, stakeholder value, the list goes on and on. And
then we watch people trying to make actual decisions based of that and, it looks
baffling. If that process doesn't make any sense, I hope you'll find this
article of, well, value.

## Value vs. cost

Most often, people who are confused by the idea of value mistake it for the idea
of cost. Engineers and managers are often guilty of that because they
instinctively strive for objectively measurable concepts like megabytes in a
computer memory and dollar numbers in a budget.

In very layman terms, a value is how much you care about something, and cost is
how much you're paying for something. While cost is a number that you can
measure, value does not really measure something, value _describes your
priorities_.

We couldn't find a better example that we can relate to than a SCRUM backlog.
The order of the items in the backlog describes the _value_ of each item; the
more valuable ones are on the top. And, the estimation numbers roughly describe
the _cost_ of processing each item.

Yes, I know, points not time, and all that. But, the irony is that it's exactly
the main problem why people struggle to implement SCRUM. Because engineers don't
see the point of committing to estimations amidst uncertainty, and project
managers see dollar signs in those numbers; however engineers reframe them. And
so, one side looks at the value and the other looks at the cost. No wonder they
disagree a lot.

Value is always implicit, and cost is always explicit. Although they're two
different things, they are innately linked to each other through the process of
valuation. A bit more on this later.

## So, what is value

Now, when it comes to what software companies do there are a fair few types of
value. As I said, a value is a measure of how much one cares for something, and
different people care for different things. Moreover, what they care for changes
with every day of the week, weather patterns, and the moon phases.

Generally speaking though, there are the following types of values that people
tend to talk about within the software development context.

- **User value** - things that all users of a product care about; as in, anyone
  who has access to the product
- **Customer value** - often times, not all users of a product are the actual
  customers. And by customers here we mean explicitly the users that pay for the
  product
- **Stakeholder value** - People who have special interest in certain features
  of a product are called stakeholders; those may or may not be actual users.
  Product managers, UX designers, reliability engineers, compliance officers,
  even sales, all of those groups of people may care about certain features of a
  product.
- **Shareholder value** - shareholders are the investors and all sorts of people
  who, well, hold the company shares and/or options. Those people not
  necessarily care about any of the product features, they mostly care about the
  price of shares they hold. More precisely that the prices keep growing.
- **Employee value** - it describes how much the company employees value working
  at the company over other employment options they might have. Company culture,
  career growth, remuneration packages, perks, etc. Those all parts of what's
  known as the employee value proposition.

There are probably a few that I'm missing here, and I'm also not including here
terms such **unique value proposition** and such. But, generally speaking those
are the types of value that I want you to keep in mind as we go into the next
chapter.

## What's business value

The reason why conversations about business value, and why I needed that lengthy
preamble is because there is not a whole lot of agreement on the meaning of
business value. But, for the purpose of this article we could define it as
following:

Business value is, well, what business values. It is essentially a combination
of other types of values that defines the business. Let me give you some
examples.

**A product company** is a type of company that defines it's business value
primarily through the process of maximising the customer value. Other types of
value are definitely present, but the company is primarily focused on customers.
This is the type of company most companies in SaaS wants to be, but sadly that's
not always the case in the reality.

**A stakeholder driven company** those are often technology companies, or
passion projects driven by SME individuals. Many seemingly product companies,
are in fact stakeholder driven through visionary leadership rather than
interactions with the customer. What defines them is the **the stakeholder
value** is made a priority over everything else.

**Growth companies** have one very important aspect in common. They're trying to
attract investment to survive the growth. Depending on how the founders played
the investment game in the early days, a company can be pressed very hard to
maximise the shareholder value in this phase.

Companies often have a choice in how to define their business value. And that is
where having very purposefully defined company values is important. Because that
combination of values will define the company for a very long time.

## Value and valuation

As I have mentioned before that value and cost, or "price" to be more precise,
are linked through the process of valuation. Price is defined by market based on
the value and the market conditions.

Price is not defined on value alone though, it is a subject to supply and
demand, but also all sorts of other, often poorly understood, criteria. For
example your old laptop might have a lot of sentimental value to you, but there
are thousands of used laptops available on the market, so they are valued quite
low.

That's a very crude and usually misleading explanation when it comes to
companies and their business value valuation. SaaS companies, due to their
anticompetitive strategies nature, are usually unique, and their future is
rather unpredictable.

Long story short, very roughly we can say that a company valuation is a
reflection of the expected future cash flow. It's obviously not that simple, but
for the purpose of this article we could say that a pre-public company valuation
depends on how much money they are expected to make in the future.

And now we can tie it all together in a very simple definition. Generally
speaking, to the market business value is in creating that cash flow and
ultimately profits. But business value might not necessarily be defined through
market. A business might define its value through making social impact, or
making their employee lives happier, or pushing the limits of technology
further, or a myriad of other things.

Ultimately, a business value is what the business values; where its priorities
are, and that's the only thing that matters.
