---
slug: lEfNk
title: How to build a good culture
---

There is no shortage of talk about building a good culture in organisations
those days. And if you have red my article about the
[inner workings of a culture](/posts/we0V4) -- yes, a shameless plug -- you know
I have a rather specific view on the subject.

And so, today, I wanted to step away from those generalisms and talk more
specifics: how to actually build a decent culture. And yes, it doesn't have to
involve buying a ping-pong table and hanging the company values posters in the
office.

## What are the rules

As I said in my previous article, I'm not a huge fan of values based culture
creation. Because it's not specific enough for the actual goal we're trying to
achieve; which is building a great engineering culture. And so, instead, I will
talk about it in terms of creating a good solid environment conducive to
creative work, such as software engineering.

My main problem with values driven environments is that they tend to mostly
contain and proliferate the founders values rather than the group's needs and
wants. It's great if the founders know what they're doing and can set good norms
for their peers rather for their own comfort. But, more often than not, that's
not the case and it's "my way or the highway", all the way to the IPO.

Instead, I want to talk about the fundamentals; about building a great working
environment with strong peers cohesion from scratch. How it works and what's
important.

If you are interested in this topic, you have most likely heard terms such as
"psychological safety", "blameless culture", and so on. They are not wrong, but,
there is a superstructure that includes all those great points.

There are most likely more than one way to look at it, but there is a framework
that had stuck with me throughout the years. It defines the requirements for a
person's safe and productive attachment to a peer group and it includes the
following three fundamental questions:

1. Do I belong here?
2. Do we have a future together?
3. Am I safe?

As a leader, you need to forgo your own comfort and focus on those three.

## Culture and belongingness

Belongingness is the foundation of any strongly cohesive group dynamic. It is
the sense of belongingness that generates the implicit trust that all high
performing teams require to operate successfully; especially if a decent amount
of stress and uncertainty involved.

Belongingness is a double edged tool though. The easiest way to cultivate a
sense of belongingness is to run an exclusive club. If all the members are
essentially the same, then the sense of belongingness comes by default. The
problem with exclusive cubs though is that they don't scale and they don fare
well when they face change.

We don't have to walk far to see examples of that. The history of open-source is
littered with the white middle-class dude communities. They all struggle to
expand beyond those circles even when they try really hard to be open and
inclusive. Because, if an new member is not like the 90% of a homogeneous group,
they won't feel like they belong there, no matter what the group say.

And that brings us to the main point. We call this a _sense_ of belonging
because it is intuitive and non-verbal. Words don't really matter much here, and
a person needs to _feel_ like they belong to a group, not to rationalise it.

The problem here is that belongingness grows out of one's _identity_. If a
person can bring their whole self into a group and drop their barriers -- and
hence become a productive member of a peer group -- then they can say that they
belong there. If on the other hand, their identity is not acknowledged or
considered inferior the identities of the rest of the group, then this person is
bound to struggle regardless of anyone's best efforts and intentions.

There is a way out of this mess, and it's called **diversity**. An identity of a
group can be purposefully crafted around the idea of diversity as the unifying
factor. If a group is purposefully non-homogeneous, and differences are innately
valued, then it is bringing that unique self into the group that turns into the
bonding factor. Being different brings value to the group.

It is a surprisingly difficult feat to pull off, though. Basically because in
any diverse environment there is usually a dominant group that will _allow_ for
the diversity to exist for as long as their own status at the top of the food
chain is not challenged.

And that brings us to the most difficult idea to stomach. If we want to build a
culture that scales and evolves long term, we need to build a culture around
diversity. And the only way to build a diversity based culture is to build a
diverse leadership team. And the only way to build a high functioning and
diverse leadership team is when the big boss is not a member of the dominant
group.

Look, I didn't say it will be easy. Nothing worth doing is easy.

## The future that binds us

In my humble opinion, one of the moronic thing any leader can do is to threaten
firing people if they won't do what they are told. Another one in the same
category would be going into redundancies and expect that those who remain would
feel grateful to still have a job. Here is another one, hire a whole lot of
contractors to get to the market faster.

What do you think all of those decisions have in common and why they are
detrimental to creating a good robust culture? It's just one thing: those
decisions either threaten or don't assume continuity in a relationship.

Continuity, or shared future, is another critical ingredient in any healthy
culture. Because if there is no future, or the future is highly uncertain, then
why bother? Why bother going extra mile, why bother to be helpful, why even
bother staying with the group? Time is universally in a limited supply for
everyone, and no-one in their right mind will invest their most precious assent
into something that has no future.

Even the most loyal to the company and it's mission will mentally check out and
play it safe if their future with the company is threatened.

Employment is a source of income for most people, but it is also a source of
purpose. It is especially true for the most impactful creative professionals.
Because creative people seek creative experiences, that's how they derive
meaning and value in their lives. And an act of creation is innately linked with
things to come, the future. Break that link and you break the reason for a
creative person to show up for work.

The opposite is also true. Buy creating a lofty goal, a leader can create a
narrative where the work people do is linked to a shared future. And that is why
"lets change the world for the better" slogans are so effective, even though
they are kind of a cringe. The goal doesn't have to be saving the world though,
it could as well be as mundane as building a decent place to work.

If a sense of belongingness is a fundament for trust and formation of a robust
culture, then the shared future is the glue that keeps everyone together.

## Safe environment

There is and endless list of amazing articles about psychological safety at a
work place. So, I won't beat around the bush and repeat the point. But, I wanted
to add a few points that relate to building a good culture at work.

If belongingness and shared future are prerequisites for people to show up
excited about work, then their safety basically defines the limits to as far as
people will go in their efforts.

Creative work is always exploratory and uncertain. Every time an engineer takes
up a ticket and start writing code, they take risks. Risks that thing won't pan
out the way they imagined, risks that they will run into unexplored areas, risks
that their solution will explode weeks later. And they will only take as much
risks as their appetite for possible repercussions will allow them.

Here is the problem though. The team's leader/manager is the most privileged
person in the group. As the result they won't _feel_ or _see_ the risks the way
the people who actually do the work do. It is especially true in a
cross-functional environment where the leader can't make innate value judgements
for half of the people on the team.

One smart person described it this way. Imagine you're working at a nuclear
waste excavation and disposal site, and you have a Geiger's counter. Actually
most of your team don't, it's just a few of them have geiger counters. Just
_believing_ that everyone's safe without listening to those who can actually
measure the environment is basically irresponsible.

Psychological safety issues in a team don't start with the leadership or it's
strongest members, they affect the most vulnerable first. Junior devs,
minorities, people who are going through a rough patch in life. Those are the
people you have to _really listen to_ if you are serious about building
psychological safety at work.

Ever heard of a canary in a mine? Every single team has one. Make sure you find
them and listen to them all the time.

## Closing remarks

I'll try to wrap it up in a rather controversial way. But this is the best
analogy I have at the moment.

Has it ever bugged you how much similarity there is between christian religious
structures and contemporary run off the mill corporate business setting? In most
of those companies an employee is expected to universally accept the N values,
and then demonstrate unconditional trust into the clergy and their decisions.

Given how long christianity has survived so far, it might be not the most
terrible idea. But there is also a very dramatic history of suppressed
innovation and intolerance for divergent ideas. And so, if we're trying to
create a culture that supports disruptive innovation, that might be not the best
system to use as a template.

Where you might want to look instead is copying practices from creative
undergrounds, because that is where innovation naturally happen. And most of
those share similar traits: praising diversity, shared drive for building the
better tomorrow, and looking after the most vulnerable members of the community.

Do that in any form that works for you and you will be better off in terms of
building a productive engineering culture than 90% of those companies that hang
their values posters on walls
