---
title: Managers, leaders, and executives
draft: true
---

A manager, a leader, and an executive, those terms are often used
interchangeably and refer to the same type of person. And that's fine in most
situations. But, then again, titles are a bit of confetti words in software
industry and often thrown around aimlessly.

And so, although those terms can be used interchangeably, there is a specific
connotation behind each of those. And today I wanted to dig into the subject a
little bit and share my thinking.

## The types of leaders

We could think of all three of those as essentially _leaders_. Because, when you
have people following, you have leaders. But, there is more than one way to
lead.

When we think about leaders in general terms, people normally go for an image of
a fearless alpha person charging in front of the pack, pushing through
obstacles, and paving the way for the rest of the team.

But then there are another types of leaders. There are grey cardinals types that
lead from behind the scenes. There are secular leaders that appeal to the
people's inner strength. And then there are parents who navigate their children
by being a responsible adult on their behalf. In their own ways they all tell
other people what to do, meaning they lead them.

That brings us to the subject of leadership styles. All humans are different,
and that includes leaders. Which results in different ways to lead people. Some
get into everyone's face, some lead by making sense, and some lead by being a BS
shield for their team.

Leadership is a tough gig, and it takes everything out of a person to be
effective in a leadership position. And so, naturally, people tend to play to
their strengths, and as a result develop preferences, which result in different
types of leaders.

## Roles of leaders

Personal preferences is only a half of the story though. Because any
sufficiently large organisation requires a collection of different leadership
roles to move forward.

A good example that we nerds can relate to is team based competitive online
video games. A small team of say 3 people might entirely consist of three
different types of leaders. There is a recurring pattern that repeats itself
from a game to a game:

1. a **breach** - a person who goes in first and causes the bulk of the initial
   damage
2. a **tactician** - a person that think of the overall situation, they usually
   have some sort of scanning capabilities
3. a **medic** - the one who manages resources and heals others

And so, there are two halves to the story. There are individual strengths and
personal preferences, but there are also different tasks and roles that need to
be enacted in order for the team to be successful.

This pattern repeats itself not just in video games, but also in actual real
life organisations. Because the underlying system, the human nature is the same.
And I hope you can now see how it relates to the subject of this article.

## The managers

The role of a managers is to manage resources. And in terms of our little video
games analogy, a manager is, in many ways, like a combat medic.

The role of a manager is to make sure the team doesn't run out of resources, and
energy. And it's a critical role in any organisation because others might not
necessarily think of those matters deeply while in the midst of their own
responsibilities.

Some managers, act like secular leaders, they manage the situation by managing
the people. Some managers assume a balls buster stance, and manage through a
stick and carrot incentives. But, ultimately, they all perform the same role,
they set the team up for success by managing resources.

There is no real difference from the manager seniority level in this aspect.
Whether that is a middle-management EM, or a general manager of the
organisation. A CEO is usually expected to be a very good manager.

## The leaders

If we continue with out little video game analogy, leaders are the ones who
break things. Some of them are nice about it some are not. But, the point of
their work is the same: we need to break old things so that the new ones could
have the room to grow.

If you want to address collected technical debt, hire a tech lead. Want to
restructure an ecosystem, hire a principal engineer. Want to re-build processes,
hire a HoE. Want to rebuild the culture, hire a CTO.

The thing to understand about leaders is that they are not here to make friends.
They are here to inflict damage. More likely than not they will make enemies.
And so, just like in a video game a good breach should be paired with a combat
medic; a good leader needs to be paired with a good manager who can help with
sorting out the aftermath.

The confusing part is that both managers and leaders can have exactly the same
titles. Which is a bit ironic, because many organisations often don't really
understand the difference between those two, and hire blindly, or expect a
person to be good at both. Which is rare, and actually much more difficult to
achieve from the team dynamics perspective.

If you look at my engineering roles diagram, though. You can roughly think about
it this way. The two pathways in the engineering career, the technical and the
managerial ones, roughly reflect this parity. There is technical _leadership_
path, and then there is the engineering _management_ one. Both have their role
to play.

## The executives

Well, if you have followed my frivolous video games analogy and you now think
that executives are the strategic type separate from the other two, consider
yourself rickrolled. Yeah, I know, I wish it was that easy, it would be neat to
have them three for three lined up like that. But no, an _executive_ is actually
pretty much the opposite of strategic.

When you listen to people talking about business development, you will
constantly hear about strategy and execution. It's always the two: strategy and
execution. Both have to be great in order for a company to be successful in the
modern competitive environment.

An _executive_ literally means someone with the power to execute a strategy. And
as such they belong to the _managerial_ lineage in an organisation; often
referred to as the "top management". CEO is an _executive_, and VPoE is a
technology executive.

CTO may or may not be an _executive_. In pure form, a CTO is a strategist, but
you need to think past the titles and look the roles instead. Sometimes CTO is
both, sometimes just one, and sometimes they are neither.

## The strategist

And so, if an _executive_ is not a strategist, then who is? Well, that's a bit
complicated. Generally speaking everyone. But mileage can differ.

If I'd generalise it very broadly, then technically speaking the `heads of` are
responsible for the creation of what's known as a strategic context. But
strategic context needs to be created collaboratively, otherwise the execution
will fail. And as such most of the leadership team is involved in strategy.

Moreover, if we start looking at the problem from the perspective of
organisational enablement. Then, the entire organisation should participate in
this process. The more brains can strategise the better. And in that light, the
person who is responsible for _formulating_ the strategy is not necessarily the
one who came up with it.

Every type of leader needs to be a bit of a strategist in their own field.
Because thinking things through is what seniority is all about. And now, I can
tie it back to my silly video game analogy.

The **breach** should have worked out their own plan, and so should the
**medic**. The **tactician** is the CEO in this group, they have the executive
authority, and their job is to make sure that strategies are worked out and that
the team members have all the up to date information and can follow through. The
_executive_ orchestrates if you will. They are _accountable_ for the entire
operation.

Did I just rickrolled you twice in a row? Yes, I did.

<!-- ![Never give you up](./images/rickroll.gif) -->

## A mixed bag of goodies

In real life there is rarely a clean cut between the three. People have mixed
talents, and they can stretch to fill in for one or another role. Still the
structure very much persists whenever groups of people involved in solving
complex problems.

As such, it is my believe that it is a mistake to mix all managers, leaders, and
executives into the same category and use the terms interchangeably. Because, it
is the lack of understanding and respecting the nature of different leadership
types that leads to the most common organisational problems.

A company hires a manager expecting them to be a leader. Or, they hire a leader
and then act baffled they start breaking things instead of managing resources.
The most common case is that a company hires a leader to break and re-build
something, but then can't stomach the change and won't have the leader's back
when they start roughing the feathers. All of those are avoidable problems.

The important thing to understand here is that none of those roles are better
than the other; more important than the other; or subordinate to one another.
Some people are naturally better at one mode of operation than the other. And
it's the right combination of people and traits that makes a team tick.

## Wrapping up

Well, that's all I have for you for now. I hope it was helpful, or at least
entertaining.

I'll see you all in the next one.
