---
title: On culture and belonging
---

I don't think there is a way to avoid the company culture conversations those
days. Ever since the idea that culture beats strategy was established, everyone
seem to have been focused on trying to build a great culture at work. Some
companies even try to productise the culture itself.

As you have probably guessed, I have a few things to say on the subject.

## The anatomy of culture

The recipe for culture seem pretty straight forward those days. You get everyone
in a company into a room, ask all sorts of rather nebulous questions, gather
feedback. Then dump that feedback into a dumpster, and assign to the company
values that you think fit your vision for the company. Put those on your
web-site. Done. Culture.

Sarcasm aside, there is a method to the madness. Culture is formed around shared
values. And values are something that people, well, innately value and accept as
true unconditionally. Say if two people like sandwiches, you have a sandwiches
appreciation culture. Other two like bigotry, you have a bigotry culture between
them.

And so companies leadership those days tries to tap into this bonding process by
setting company values in hopes of spawning a uniformed culture. Which, as the
theory goes, supposed to result in better performance.

The same goes for changing a culture. You change the values, those who agree
with the new norms stay, those who disagree leave. You attract and repeal the
right kind of people to proliferate the culture at the company. Some even try to
measure how well people fit into the culture.

Except, it doesn't exactly work like that. Firstly, values are innately
subjective, and therefore cannot be objectively measured. Secondly, not all
values are helpful; it's actually only a very specific group of values that have
the potential to improve performance. And lastly, this approach can actively
harm diversity within a company with all the negative consequences.

## The traffic jam

I'll try to explain culture in a slightly different, less conventional, way.

I used to live in an apartment that overlooked a busy narrow one way street. And
so, every day I would see a long line of cars stuck under my windows: some are
leaving, some new arriving and trotting along. A constant flow of cars in a
slowly moving traffic jam.

On most days it would be relatively quiet. Cars come in, cars come out. But on
some days, something would happen, like road works, or someone gets upset over a
pedestrian jaywalking across the road. A car would beep, and then another one,
and then another. People get agitated, stressed, and start behaving poorly while
being stuck in the line of cars.

The weirdest thing is that this constant beeping will just hang in the air the
whole day. The original problem and drivers who started it are long gone, but
the beeping stays. Old cars leave, new ones arrive, pick up the aggressive
attitude from other cars, start beeping, and then leave.

This idea that something wrong just hangs in the air like a toxic cloud
poisoning people's attitudes all day, until all traffic ceases at night. And the
next day it'll be like nothing had happened.

A culture is like that, it's an idea that people share. And this idea
self-perpetuates through groups of people when they interact. And this idea
stays present long after people who first voiced it out are gone.

## How culture actually works

I think "culture" is a rather misleading word for what it is, actually.
_Bonding_ or _attachment_ would be a more appropriate one.

In historical terms, society and culture are relatively new phenomena. Just as
most of the language is. As a specie we performed the exact same bonding rituals
we call "culture" for hundreds of thousands of years before the idea of society
and modern language appeared.

This idea of group belongingness and bonding is so strongly hard wired into us,
that isolation and loneliness physically hurt. The recent research showed that
the same exact brain regions we use to process physical pain activate when we
process social isolation. We literally go mad without human connection.

We are social creatures, social exclusion feels wrong. We really want to belong
to a group of people to improve our chances of survival. And the way
belongingness works is through bonding over shared ideas. Yes, exactly like
culture.

The weirdest thing is that it works completely backwards than we think. It's not
so much that people are attracted/rejected by specific values, it's more that if
a person _wants_ to be a part of a peer group, they will _adopt_ the group's
values as the means of bonding with them. And if they don't want to belong to a
group, they'll find their values stupid.

Look around you. Thousands of years of religious leadership, rampant
nationalism, etc, etc. It's not like normal people _value_ being bigots, or
serve straight up genocidal maniacs. No, they want to belong to a group that
improves their chances of survival, and then adopt those group norms as their
own values.

And that is exactly what happens in the employment market. Nobody in all
seriousness really cares about a no-name startup putting such and such as their
values their web-site. But, the same people will adopt a big-name company values
with almost religious zeal, because it's a more powerful peer group that can
assure their steady employment in the years to come.

We all do this dance without the thought even consciously registering in our
minds.

## What a high performing culture looks like

If that little pondering above got through to you, then the first thing you need
to understand is this. Words don't matter, behaviours do. What people innately
want is to belong to a group that provides safety and purpose. And your group
behaviour needs to reflect that in order to attract more members.

People, especially the creative people who have a bit of an outlier streak to
them, need to feel safe. Physically, but most importantly psychologically in
order to do their best work. And that is where creative teams performance
originates from. A safe environment where they can try new things.

When we talk about psychological safety, I'm not just talking about people being
free of emotional abuse and bigotry from their peers. I'm also talking about the
emotional cost of failure. Because if the cost of failure is high, people won't
take risks. And if people won't take risks, you won't have innovation.

And that is where the bulk of people management efforts should go into. To
create a safe and nourishing environment where people are free to bring
themselves to work, take risks, and not feel the wrath of punishment when things
don't go the way they were planned.

In safe environments there are no long speeches and complex hierarchies. All
interactions are quick and to the point, people maintain eye contact, and they
joke a lot. Decisions are made quickly without endless meetings to "sync". All
this can take place because people _trust each other_.

You can always tell a high performing team when you see jokes being taken a
little bit too far, but nobody gets offended. It's like a constant pinging going
on: "am I safe here? what if I do this, do you still like me?".

My 2.5yo daughter does this non stop. She pushes buttons a bit too far all the
time. But, she doesn't do this to be annoying or elicit attention. She does it
to double check that I can take it, and she's safe with her parent no matter
what.

In a way, we all do this in the peer groups where we feel safe. It's just a hard
wired pinging mechanism that keeps ticking in our brains without us realising
it.

## Implementation notes

To be clear, I don't really argue against having explicitly defined values and
such. The point I'm making is that they don't really matter all that much,
because our need for safety and belongingness runs much deeper and goes beyond
the language.

Moreover, poorly defined values that reflect the founder's preferences rather
the need to care for people might work against the company's best interests
because they might repel otherwise valuable members of the team.

And finally, there is also a tendency among leadership to implement values in a
rather passive aggressive way. They define them on paper, and then leave the
enforcement to KPIs and annual reviews.

There is a better way to think about culture. In military they have a good
saying for that: _culture is what you tolerate_. And I think that is a smarter
approach to the problem, because it turns it upside down.

What you really need to do as a leader is to be _consistently intolerable_
towards behaviours that diminish people's sense of safety and belongingness. Do
not tolerate blaming, punitive actions, and just common ass-holery among the
team members. Because when people start asking themselves "am I next?", that is
where trust is lost and an organisation starts to rot from the within.

Culture is like a bowl of candies. Every time you do something right as a
leader, you get one candy in. Every time you betray the trust of people, you get
a few hand fulls of candies taken out. A classical asymmetric risk situation.
