---
title: Managers, leaders, and executives
description: Digging into the corporate leadership anatomy
thumbnail: ./images/types-of-leaders.png
tags:
  - leadership
  - management
medium:
  tags:
    - Leadership
    - Management
    - Engineering management
    - Executive
draft: true
---

A manager, a leader, and an executive, those terms are often used
interchangeably and refer to the same type of person. And that's fine in most
situations. But, then again, titles are a bit of confetti words in software
industry and often thrown around aimlessly.

And so, although those terms can be used interchangeably, there is a specific
connotation behind each of those. And today I wanted to dig into the subject a
little bit and share my thinking.

## The types of leaders

We could think of all three of those as essentially _leaders_. Because, when you
have people following, you have leaders. But, there is more than one way to
lead.

When we think about leaders in general terms, people normally go for an image of
a fearless alpha person charging in front of the pack, pushing through
obstacles, and paving the way for the rest of the team.

But then there are another types of leaders. There are grey cardinals types that
lead from behind the scenes. There are secular leaders that appeal to the
people's inner strength. And then there are parents who navigate their children
by being a responsible adult on their behalf. In their own ways they all tell
other people what to do, meaning they lead them.

That brings us to the subject of leadership styles. All humans are different,
and that includes leaders. Which results in different ways to lead people. Some
get into everyone's face, some lead by making sense, and some lead by being a BS
shield for their team.

Leadership is a tough gig, and it takes everything out of a person to be
effective in a leadership position. And so, naturally, people tend to play to
their strengths, and, as a result, develop preferences, which in turn produce
different types of leaders.

## Roles of leaders

Personal preferences is only one half of the story though. Because any
sufficiently large organisation requires a collection of different leadership
roles to move forward.

A good example that we nerds can relate to is team based competitive online
video games. A small team of say 3 people might entirely consist of three
different types of leaders. There is a recurring pattern that repeats itself
from a game to a game:

1. a **breach** - a person who goes in first and causes the bulk of the initial
   damage
2. a **tactician** - a person that think of the overall situation, they usually
   have some sort of scanning capabilities
3. a **medic** - the one who manages resources and heals others

Although the **tactician** is often referred to as the IGL (in game leader),
each other person leads in their own speciality. IGL is more of a coordinator
than a leader. Coordination is their speciality.

And so, there are two halves to the story. There are individual strengths and
personal preferences, but there are also different tasks and roles that need to
be enacted in order for a team to be successful.

This pattern repeats itself not just in video games, but also in actual real
life organisations. Because the underlying system, the human nature is the same.
And I hope you can now see how it relates to the subject of this article.

## The managers

The role of a managers is to manage resources. And in terms of our little video
games analogy, a manager is, in many ways, like a combat medic.

The role of a manager is to make sure the team doesn't run out of resources and
energy. And it's a critical role in any organisation because others might not
necessarily think of those matters deeply while in the midst of their own
responsibilities.

Some managers act like secular leaders, they manage the situation by managing
the people. Some managers assume a balls buster stance, and manage through a
stick and carrot incentives. But, ultimately, they all perform the same role,
they set the team up for success by managing resources.

There is no real difference from the manager seniority level in this aspect.
Whether that is a middle-management EM, or a general manager of the
organisation. A CEO is usually expected to be a very good manager.

## The leaders

If we continue with out little video game analogy, leaders are the ones who lead
change; commonly by breaking things. Some of them are nice about it, and some
are not. But, the point of their work is the same: we need to break old things
so that the new ones could have the room to grow.

If you want to address collected technical debt, hire a tech lead. Want to
restructure an ecosystem, hire a principal engineer. Want to rebuild the
culture, hire a CTO.

The thing to understand about leaders is that they are not here to make friends.
They are here to inflict damage. More likely than not they will make enemies.
And so, just like in a video game a good breach should be paired with a combat
medic; a good leader needs to be paired with a good manager who can help with
sorting out the aftermath.

The confusing part is that both managers and leaders can have exactly the same
titles. Which is a bit ironic, because many organisations often don't really
understand the difference between those two, and hire blindly, or expect a
person to be good at both. Which is rare, and actually much more difficult to
achieve from the team dynamics perspective.

![Engineering roles](./images/engineering-roles.png)

If you look at my engineering roles diagram, though. You can roughly think about
it this way. The two pathways in the engineering career, the technical and the
managerial ones, roughly reflect this parity. There is technical _leadership_
path, and then there is the engineering _management_ one. Both have their role
to play.

## The executives

Now if we follow with my frivolous video games analogy, then the _executives_
will be the **tactician** class. And here is where I need to slow down a little
bit, because it gets messy. People upstairs tend to take in the wrong way when
they are referred to as _tactical_ rather than _strategic_. And people
downstairs often don't know what people upstairs really do for a living. So, let
me dig it up bit by bit.

Generally speaking the term _executive_ means someone with the power to execute
plans and strategies. Whenever you listen to someone about business development
matters, it is always the two strategy and execution; both have their place in
the company success. And an executive is responsible for _execution_. Which puts
them on the opposite side of _strategy_.

If you think about this way, then executives are essentially the top of the
managerial hierarchy, and often referred to as the "top management". But, it is
a mistake, in my view, to think of them as managers. They are ex-managers.

The role of an _executive_ is to _orchestrate_ the execution. They don't lead
the change, they don't manage resources, they monitor, analyse and coordinate
the _progress_. They literally spend most of their time in reports and meetings.
Which is a critical role in any complex situation.

And in that light, a CEO is an executive. VPoE is an executive. CTO may or may
not be an executive. In their pure form CTO is actually a strategist, the
opposite of an executive.

## The strategist (bonus material)

And so, if executives are the opposite of strategists, then who are the
strategists? That's a messy topic that deserves it's own article, but I feel
that I need to go through this quickly to round it up here.

If I would water it down very liberally, then we could say that a **strategy**
as a set of rules that sit between the **vision** and the actual **plans**. But,
strategies are rather complex entities, that include functional strategies, and
coordination strategies. All of them together would form what's known as a
**strategic context**.

Think back to our video game analogy. Each speciality will have their own
functional strategy how they're going to enact their role in the team. That
includes the IGL who needs a strategy for coordinating the team members to
maximise their chances of winning the game.

Generally speaking it is the `Head of`s who are responsible for creation of the
strategic context, but they never do that alone. The entire leadership team
needs to participate in the process of strategy creation. The `Ho`'s job is to
put it in writing and communicating the strategy with others.

A CTO in this context is a rather odd figure, because if a company has a high
functioning VPoE, then CTO will be more of a strategist than an executive. The
reason for this is that in a such large organisations, there will be multiple
independent departments led by the `Ho`'s, plus some for of R&D effort, and it
is the CTO's job to make sure there is a consistent strategic context between
them.

## A mixed bag of goodies

In real life there is rarely a clean cut between the three. People have mixed
talents, and they can stretch to fill in for one or another role. Still the
structure very much persists whenever groups of people involved in solving
complex problems.

As such, it is my believe that it is a mistake to mix all: managers, leaders,
and executives into the same category and use the terms interchangeably.
Because, it is the lack of understanding and respecting the nature of different
leadership types that leads to the most common organisational problems.

A company hires a manager expecting them to be a leader. Or, they hire a leader
and then act baffled that they start breaking things instead of managing
resources. The most common case is that a company hires a leader to break and
re-build something, but then can't stomach the change and won't have the
leader's back when they start roughing the feathers. All of those are avoidable
problems.

The important thing to understand here is that none of those roles are better
than the other; more important than the other; or subordinate to one another.
Some people are naturally better at one mode of operation than the other. And
it's the right combination of people and traits that makes a team tick.

## Wrapping up

Well, that's all I have for you for now. I hope it was helpful, or at least
entertaining.

I'll see you all in the next one.
