---
slug: 0zsDU
date: 12 March 2023
title: Managing people 101
description: A few advices on people management mindset that I would give a
  freshly minted engineering manager
tags:
  - leadership
  - management
medium:
  tags:
    - Engineering management
    - People management
    - Team management
    - Leadership
  id: 1f8f4a5e072b
---

When I'm looking for engineering manager candidates among technical leads, the
way they work with other people is definitely the key. All of them are well
accomplished as technologists at this point, and they picked up enough process
knowledge to be dangerous. And so, the way they relate to other people is what
determines to me whether they are ready for the next step or not.

And yet, even with the most talent for working with other people, the first time
engineering managers often struggle with the concept of actually managing
people. And, eventually, drive the bus off the cliff a few times when they
start.

So, today I'm going to share some structures and tips. I hope it will be helpful
to some of you.

## The structure

There are always structures and ways of thinking about the world around us. We
even have the chaos theory that structures the utter chaos. Managing people is
no different, there is a method to the madness.

There are a lot of people management frameworks out there, and some of them are
a lot to take in for a person new to management and leadership. So, to help new
starters, I like to give them this very simple structure:

1. Define what the success looks like
2. Give feedback and follow up

It sounds simple, but it's not. You'd be surprised how many managers, including
very senior level ones, never learn how to do this effectively. It takes
practice until this combo becomes natural, and there are few reasons for that.

Defining success in a fair and consistent manner is surprisingly difficult. It's
even more difficult to describe it in a succinctly clear and hard to
misinterpret format. That's leadership in a nut shell.

And then there is the follow up part that presents its own challenges.
Especially when it comes to providing negative feedback and working through
differences in achieving the goals.

## Goals vs. tasks

When it comes to defining what the success looks like, people tend to think
basically in two categories: goals and tasks. Some might even think they are the
same, but there is a key difference.

Task is a measure of utility. A person is expected to complete a task as closely
to the specification as possible, and as quickly as possible. For example:

> Hey, you there! I want to hang a picture on this wall, so if it's not too much
> trouble, please drill me a hole right here where I'm pointing.

A goal is a different thing all together and in this case would sound something
like this:

> I have this picture that needs hanging. When you have a moment, would you mind
> hanging it somewhere where it's aesthetically pleasing? Thank you.

The key here is to remember that you are managing very smart and creative
people. Giving them tasks is degrading to their intelligence. If they wanted to
move units, they'd work at a factory. They are not here to do your bidding, they
are here to problem solve. And, it is your job as a manager to give them
problems, not solutions.

You can set up career goals, project goals, business goals, etc. Just remember,
to set goals together with the people you manage, collaboratively. Because goals
that you just hand down to people, are called tasks. In the end of the day you
need the people to own the goals.

The only person you should be giving tasks to is your boss, actually. Tell you a
secret, bosses love tasks, it makes them feel useful on the inside. But, the
tradition dictates that they are supposed to say "no" three times to your
requests before doing anything about it. So, use them sparingly

## Corrective feedback

When you defined your goals well this part is just plain hard. And, when you
defined your goals poorly, this part is doubly hard, and also awkward. Because
nobody wants to work for two weeks on something just to hear from their manager:
"hey, i didn't think it through well the last time, so I've changed my mind"

The purpose of feedback is to course correct. Which means that feedback needs to
be thought through and consistent. This is where the _collaborative_ goal
setting pays off. Because you will always have the leverage of: "I believe we
had agreed on bla, why am I seeing not bla?" in those conversations.

When people do what they're supposed to do, feedback is easy; probably my
favourite part of the job, actually. You just hand out some gold stars, say
"thank you", and move onto the next batch of fires to put down.

When, on the other hand, things aren't going so smoothly, that is where you need
to be most diligent and consistent. Coincidently this is where the first time
engineering managers falter the most. Because giving corrective feedback is
uncomfortable. And, it's easy to feel attacked when you're on the other side of
it.

When we're facing a tense situation our fight or flight response kicks in, and
the natural way to think about the situation is that we have basically two
options: either let it slide, or challenge the other person. And that is
precisely how monkeys sort things out. We, as a bit more evolved mammals, don't
have to do either of those.

There is a third option, it is called the _assertive_ mode of interaction. You
neither flee nor challenge. You offer your perspective, reiterate your
expectations, and then let the other person figure out how to respond. Most
likely they will respond with a flight or fight reaction, because you're their
manager. But, after a while, things will settle down and you will get back to
problem solving in no time.

Giving corrective feedback is never easy, it is always uncomfortable, even when
you get better at it. The sooner you realise that this is part of the job and
embrace the discomfort the better. Also, same as with goals setting, thinking
about feedback in collaborative format, helps a lot.

Never boss people around, but also, never ever skip on corrective feedback
because _you are uncomfortable_ with the process. The people you manage deserve
you being clear and consistent with them. That is where you really earn your
standing with your people as a leader.

## The key

Some of you are very smart people, and you might be thinking to yourself: _okay,
set goals and follow up. how is that different from normal project management?_.
And you are right, it does sound exactly like project management: set goals and
follow up. The difference is that you're not managing projects, you're managing
people.

This sounds dumb simple, and yet this fact somehow eludes many managers. The
ability to see other people, not as tools, resources, projects, but as human
beings is what separates good managers from the average ones.

As long as you keep seeing people as means to an end, and implement the
goal/follow up system mechanically, you will keep failing as a manager. The
reason for this is that you're going to rationalise yours and people's
behaviour. And that's a straight road to disappointment. Because people are
messy and irrational; including yourself. And until you really embrace this
fact, you're not going to progress as a people leader.

For the goals/feedback system to work effectively and collaboratively you need
to _earn_ the trust of the person you're managing. And trust is never a default
mode of operation between a manager and an employee, because the manager always
has the upper hand. The trust needs to be _earned_. And the only way to reliably
earn the trust of another human being is to build a human connection with them;
to see them as people.

So, listen to their gripes, and complains, and brags. Try to really understand
their unique needs and wants without judgement. Even if those needs and wants
seem stupid or irrelevant to you. Because they have full rights to do whatever
they want with their life, and your judgement doesn't mean anything in the grand
schema of things.

Once you do that. They you will naturally tailor the goals and the follow up
style to those needs and wants of the person you're managing. And that is the
key to make the management work effective.

## Wrapping up

In the end of the day, people are not going to remember how many features you
shipped, how much money you made, and how many raises you gave them. But, they
will remember how you related to them. Did you see them as unique human beings?
Did you validate their wacky needs and wants? Did you show up as a human being
yourself?

People will remember whether you showed gratitude when they succeeded, they will
remember whether you offered your council when they struggled, and whether you
were there for them when they failed.

You will know you're doing something right when people management starts to feel
less like management and more like spending quality time with your people.
