---
slug: ScQXs
date: 29 May 2023
title: On managing people's energy
description: A deep dive into managing people and their energy levels
thumbnail: ./images/manage-people-energy.png
tags:
  - management
  - leadership
medium:
  tags:
    - Management
    - Engineering management
    - People management
    - Leadership
  id: aad4b24a6daa
---

The standard off the shelf management wisdom often goes something like this:
"Set up quantifiable KPIs and watch out for burnouts". And while that sounds
sensible, the roots of the problem go way deeper than that. So, today I wanted
to dig a little bit deeper into this.

## What do managers do?

I have said it multiple times in my past articles, but I will repeat it one more
time here. The primary purpose of a manager is to manage resources. All other
aspects being equal, the best managers apply the available limited resources,
well, better.

By resources we usually mean money, the blood of any organisation. And sometimes
that translates into human resources and infrastructure as well. But, I dare to
say, that it goes further than that. Because people's motivation plays an
enormous role in organisational performance and needs to be managed as well.

Motivation is a complex topic though. There is definitely impact of the culture
and belonging. There is definitely the element of purpose, and exploration, and
creative expression of a person. But we can look at it from a slightly different
perspective.

Everything that humans do is limited by the amount of energy that they can bring
to work. That is one of the most important, if not _the_ most important factor
that defines an organisation's performance as a whole. And that makes people's
_energy_ one of the most important resource to manage well.

## What energy is made of?

Just like in physics, people's energy is everywhere in an organisation. It
defines everything in an organisation: why people show up for work every day;
how far they take their work; how much risk are they willing to take; and what
do they do when they face obstacles.

Unlike the real world though, an organisation is not a closed ecosystem. People
bring energy into it on the daily basis, and then that energy transforms into
products, which in turn transform into profits. Without people brining this
energy into the system on a _continuous_ basis, there will be no organisation.

This energy a structure that can be described this way:

- Physical energy
- Emotional energy
- Give-a-fuck energy

When the **physical energy** runs out, a person is just tired; they can sleep it
off. When the **emotional energy** runs out, a person goes into what's known as
a burnout; they will need a significant break from work to recover. When their
**give-a-fuck** energy runs out, there is no way back; people just resign.

## One's best is not the same

Because of our purpose as managers, we want to use available resources in the
most optimal way we can. And, as the result, we want to see the best effort from
each individual; hence we would go a long way to make sure that happens.

The problem with this kind of thinking is that people's best is not the same
every day. On some days people are pumped and they can move mountains. On other
days they only can chug along at a steady pace. And on some days a person's best
is to just lay face down and do nothing the entire day.

The fallacy here is that we know that a person's energy fluctuates from day to
day and so we average it out. And then two things happen: because nobody can
really measure the energy, the "averaging out" is eyeballed to a higher level
than it really is; and secondly, the person is implicitly expected to show that
at least average level on a daily basis.

Even if we could objectively measure the energy levels, the math doesn't add up
and this system routinely pushes people to overcommit. And then once a person
gets out of their way to deliver on those unrealistic expectations, that level
of performance becomes the new norm and the whole set of expectations shifts up
for everyone. It is not a surprise that the tech industry has an epidemic of
burnouts at the moment.

## A word on optimality

Now, here is a plot twist. The reason why organisations in tech routinely burn
people to the ground is not because people have limits. The primary reason is
because is us the managers who are hell bent on building the most optimal
systems we can.

When it comes to stability, systems thinking identifies three types of systems:

- `Fragile` - those crumble under environmental changes. A house of cards is a
  good example
- `Robust` - those can take a lot of beating before they fail. An old oil drum
  for example is a robust system
- `Anti-fragile` - those become stronger as more pressure applied to them.
  Diamonds are anti-fragile for example

When a manager sees productivity as their life purpose and they try to apply
given resources as optimally as they can, they don't build robust systems, they
build fragile ones. Because any deviation in people's ability to bring in that
energy consistently, or changes in the market's environment, will inevitably
topple that carefully balanced system.

And that brings us to the paradox of management. On one hand it is our purpose
to apply resources as optimally as possible. But on the other hand optimally
applied resources create fragile systems that inevitably fail and then spend an
ungodly amount of energy on recovery; which defies the point.

## How the energy is exhausted

Before we go into managing and solutions, I think it's worth pausing for a
second and talk about how the energy is exhausted. Because it's not as simple as
it seems.

We like to think of the system as a straight pipeline: people bring energy into
the system and that energy is transformed into products. But, that's not
entirely the case. Because a lot of energy is exhausted into other avenues and
keeping track of those is equally important.

The **physical energy** is, in fact, exhausted into day to day product
development. But it literally starts to burn through the people when a team goes
on double-time like outages, crunch-time, long term pushing for goals. It is
worth to remember that studies show that a person on average has a capacity for
only 4 hours of deep focus a day. Pushing people beyond that on a regular basis
will burn into their reserves.

The **emotional energy** depends on the emotional climate within an organisation
and starts burning whenever there is drama involved. Emotional energy recovers
very slowly too. So, whenever a person runs out of it, they get stuck in a loop
of having no energy to deal with the drama and feeling bad about themselves.
That's your basic recipe for a burnout.

The **give-a-fuck** energy is built of trust and purpose. Whenever either of
those is betrayed the give-a-fuck energy gets depleted, and it never really goes
back unless an exceptional effort is applied.

## How to manage the energy

I hope by now the basic idea is rather clear: we need to manage the three energy
levels.

1. Invest into best practices and quality to avoid burning into physical energy
2. Never let organisational dramas linger for longer that necessary
3. Don't betray your people's trust in you as a manager, ever

And the most importantly, don't play efficiency tetris with your resources.
Efficient systems are fragile, and that's not what you want in a multi-year
endeavour like a software engineering organisation. Build robust systems, think
an oil drum not a house of cards. You can kick an oil drum down the hill for
weeks and it will be fine.

And that's a wrap. See you next week.
