---
slug: eoNUM
date: 20 March 2023
title: When to stop coding
description: Some thoughts on when an engineering manager should let go of the tools
thumbnail: ./images/stop-coding.png
tags:
  - management
  - career
medium:
  tags:
    - Engineering Management
    - Software Engineering
    - Career development
    - Career
  id: 8d11c0100c3f
---

As we grow our careers, and we climb higher and higher, at some point most
engineers face the prospects of parting with the tools. And many of us struggle
with the process. And so the question of _when is it the time to stop coding?_
crops up regularly. Having wrestled with this very question myself in the past,
I have figured this might be a good topic for a post.

## What got you here, won't get you there

A career of a software engineer is a bit of a wretched one. Half of a career we
spend on getting really good at programming, and then we're promoted to a
management position and have to throw most of that skill away.

On a surface of it this seems like a bad news and there is something wrong with
the software engineering industry. But, it is a common problem across multiple
industries, probably all of them that have teams.

Every time the pattern is the same: a person becomes very good on the tools, and
they get promoted to a manager; a person becomes very good at management and
they are promoted to senior leadership position. And with each of those changes
the same problem arises, what got them to the next level, doesn't necessarily
help them to become good on this new level.

This is very true for the senior engineer to a tech lead transition, and
especially true for the move from a tech lead to an engineering manager
position. Because they are not expected to produce code any more.

## Coping with the transition

Change is always painful, and people subconsciously try to avoid pain. And so
the coping mechanisms that people employ when they get to the next level are
surprisingly similar. People cling to what they know.

A senior engineer to a tech-lead transition will lean on their technical
prowess; the tech lead to a manager transition will continue meddling with
technical decisions; and a manager to a senior leader position will try to
continue impacting the roadmaps and processes.

That is a very natural stress response behaviour. People don't necessarily know
how to approach their new responsibilities, or don't feel confident in their new
abilities, so they try to stick to what they know in order to maintain their
world picture consistent.

While understandable, those behaviours are unproductive. Tech leads don't lead
as much they should, managers don't manage, and senior leaders don't strategise
and coach.

While they might _feel_ like they're working hard and contributing a lot, they,
in fact, don't fulfil their primary responsibilities that their role implies at
full capacity.

## The limits of possible

I understand that when I say that a person doesn't fulfil their role, that
sounds harsh. And to a degree it is, a person in fact tries their best after
all.

The problem here is that there is a limited number of hours in a day. And unless
a person enacts a some sort of custom hybrid role, they are expected to give
their new responsibilities their full attention. And when a person spends a
significant chunk of their time on doing what they are _used to do_, they don't
spend that time on what they _supposed to do_.

A technical term for an engineering manager that keeps acting as a tech lead is
an overpaid tech lead. Your boss might not say it this way out loud, but if you
are a freshly minted EM and you keep contributing to the code base, that is
exactly how they will see you. Add to that the fact that you're not that great
at your new responsibilities yet, and you will understand their displeasement.

The problem is aggravated by the fact that when you take on technical
challenges, you create expectations in other people that you're going to get it
done, and done quickly. As an EM, you will have a long slew of overdue
responsibilities, you will get distracted, and eventually drop the ball with
your technical deliveries. And now you will have both, your boss and your
engineers unhappy with you.

As a rule of thumb, a person with more than 5-7 direct reports cannot
effectively do anything else but manage those people. If they manage them well
that is. And so, an EM that has 2-4 tech leads reporting to them, will barely
have time for their other managerial duties.

As a CTO, here is what I would roughly expect from people in terms of time spent
on hands-on technical commitments:

- An IC engineer: 80%
- A tech lead: 60%
- A principal engineer: 30% (mostly R&D)
- An engineering manager: 5% (keeping up with the trends)
- Head of engineering: 0%
- Head of architecture: 5% (keeping up with the trends)
- CTO/VPoE: 0%

## The effects of contribution

There is yet another aspect of this problem that we need to consider though. And
that is how _other_ engineers perceive the work committed by their manager.

The relationship between an employee and their manager is inherently unequal.
Yes, a manager might take on a service-leadership stance in their management
style, and genuinely try to help people they manage. But, in the end of the day
it is the manager who has the upper hand over an employee. Including the right
to dismiss them.

All this means is that your reports will be much less inclined to give you an
open feedback to your code base contributions. Moreover, unless they feel
adventurous, they will avoid making changes to your code as a plague. They just
don't want to risk unnecessary conversation with their manager. Because they
know that a nail that sticks out gets hammered.

To a degree, this is a manageable problem. You can build great relationships of
trust with your reports, and/or practically twist their arms to make changes to
your codebase. But, there are still limits to what you can do here. And you will
end up doing more work than you had to if you chose not to contribute in the
first place.

## Do you _have to_ stop?

I actually make it a point to never hire engineering managers without a
technical background. It has to do with strategies and business value. But, the
long story short, an engineering manager supposed to be able to make innate
value judgements of engineering requirements, because people of other functions
won't have that ability due to differences in their background.

What this means is that technical knowledge is a valuable asset in an
engineering manager. Without that, any type of manager would do their job
easily. But, the further you go, the less important that technical knowledge
becomes. The work becomes more abstract from the codebase specifics, if that
makes sense.

And so, the question whether you have to stop coding is a complex one. You
definitely need to stop _contributing_ to production codebase as soon as
possible; I hope that sank in by now. As an EM you might fix a minor bug or two
on a regular basis, just to keep your hand on the pulse of how the engineering
process feels like at the moment. Or, a principal engineer, if they're very good
at what they do, might occasionally lend a hand to a team that struggles.

Outside of that, it really depends on how much do you actually _value_ technical
work, and how much spare time you have. Some of us, yours truly included, have
an incessant need to build stuff, and you can keep doing that as a hobby your
entire life. But, you need to recognise and respect the fact that it has very
little to do with the day job.

## Wrapping up

Look, management can feel very lonely at times. I've seen a fair bit of people
who struggled with this very question, and I can assure you, you are not alone
in this. In fact, most engineers that worth their salt wrestle with this problem
sooner or later.

The reality of it is this. At some point in your career you will have to choose
whether you want to grow, or you want to keep working on the tools. Yes, some
companies might accommodate both to a degree through role crafting, but those
are rare and fleeing setups. I wouldn't count on them long term.

You will eventually have to let go of the tools, even if you choose the
technical track. Simply because of the economic realities. There is no point of
paying very senior people a whole lot of money for the work that a tech lead can
do. And so you will eventually transition into architecture and strategy anyway.

If you want my advise, it is this: get your fill while you're young and hungry,
because you won't have a whole lot of time for the tools when you move up the
ladder. And if you're truly love just building stuff and ready to sacrifice your
career for it, then stay a tech lead forever. There are people who do that, and
plenty of them are happy with their choice. But, sacrifice you will, either way
you go.

## P.S.

Well, this turned up a bit more gloomy than expected, didn't it. So, if you're
really bummed up about letting go of the tools, there are couple of options
still available.

1. Coding as a hobby. Day job is not everything, and if your circumstances allow
   you to keep spending time outside of 9-5, you can still keep working on side
   projects. I know this is not for everyone, but it's an option. I've seen some
   very senior people smurfing in open-source and that keeps them happy and sane
   over extended hauls in management.
2. Consider detours on your management career path. Some managers occasionally
   step down in their roles and work on the tools for a bit to regain their
   footing. Short term contract work between management gigs is always an option
   and the pay might be quite comparable to a manager's salary.

I myself never really stopped coding despite running a 50+ engineering team.
There are always interesting things to build out there. Just keep a clean line
of separation between day job and your hobbies, and you will be fine.
